Now that we have discussed how convolutional neural network
operate and we discussed different types of convolutions that you might be dealing with,
I invite you to join me and do
a little exercise which will let you practice with those convolutions yourself.
Welcome to a screencast of a convolutions notebook.
This is an introduction into an exercise.
First part of this notebook will get you set up with some of
the mechanics behind convolutions and how
we'll be doing these convolutions for this exercise,
and the rest of this notebook will invite you
to write some of the convolutional code on your own.
I would like to walk you through the beginning of this exercise because I
think some things that we're touching upon here are worth talking through.
Let's see the collection of libraries that we're dealing with.
We have the Pydicom here,
the usual suspect in dealing with Python and medical images. We have the Matplotlib.
We have the NumPy. Also, we have the PyTorch here.
So PyTorch is a library for building convolutional neural networks and other types of
neural networks and PyTorch has a lot of
convenience functions for various computer vision tasks.
In particular, PyTorch has definitions for convolutional layers that you would
build into your convolutional neural networks
and we will use those layers to compute convolutions.
As we have discussed, convolutions involve moving this window onto
a convolutional kernel and computing
the values and copying these values onto a new image.
PyTorch has implementation of convolutional layers,
they take care of all this mechanics.
That's why we won't have to deal with all this math ourselves.
We'll use another library here which is called NiBabel.
This is a library which is used to load NifTI files.
You will work with this library quite a bit as well.
We will use this library called Pillow,
which is the Python library for one of
the many Python libraries for working with regular two-dimensional images.
We will be loading a bitmap in here.
So let's move on.
So let us load all those libraries and let us talk about applying convolutional filters.
First, let us define a four by four convolutional kernel and let's print this matrix.
We define an edge filter.
This is a convolutional kernel that will multiply values by one at one side of
the matrix and multiply the values by
minus one on another side of the matrix and combine them.
This is a quite typical edge filter and we will see how it works.
Let us define a convolutional layer.
We're using this Conv2d class from
the PyTorch's neural network module and this Convd2d uses a few input parameters.
So first, we need to input the input size,
the number of channels that you're dealing with.
For the purpose of this exercise,
of this little code snippet,
we will have just one channel.
We're specifying the output size, again,
one channel for the kernel size,
which is four by four, and the bias.
We will not be using biases here because we're just focusing on the weights.
Let's set up this layer and let's see what we get.
So PyTorch can print the layer in a readable format.
So we have some values here. It's looking good.
I encourage you as you will be going through
this exercise to go and read up the PyTorch's documentation.
The documentation is pretty good.
It explains what exactly those values are.
It is quite important to be precise about the dimensions of your input data.
Next, let's turn our convolutional kernel into a PyTorch tensor.
PyTorch operates on tensors.
So everything needs to be turned into a PyTorch tensor.
PyTorch conveniently has a lot of converters,
so we're just using this from NumPy methods,
which converts our NumPy array into a PyTorch tensor.
A couple of other things to note here.
We convert it into a float tensor to make
sure that it's float and we apply this unsqueeze function.
Unsqueeze function basically adds dimensions to our array.
Our array is a two by two array and
PyTorch express your parameter tensor to be four-dimensional.
So basically, the first dimension is the number of output channels,
the second dimension, number of input channels,
and then you have your kernel X and Y dimensions.
That's why we need the four-dimensional tensor and
we are not really using this output-input channel dimension.
So we can just not store anything there,
but we still need a four-dimensional tensor.
Then what we do, we just turn this parameters tensor into
a torch parameter and we use this parameter
to initialize our convolutional layer weights.
To make sure that we got our dimensions right,
let us print the shape out of our parameters tensor to make sure that it is correct.
We see it's a four-dimensional tensor.
We have one by one by four by four four-dimensional tensor.
Let's keep going. Let's load an image.
It's an image of a walrus in a aquarium,
which was playing with some kids,
and I enjoyed watching this walrus playing with the kids.
Let's convert our walrus into a grayscale image
because that's what's PyTorch is expecting.
So remember, we have one channel as an input.
We need to have something where the values are located on a linear scale.
So we convert the integer data types that we have in the image
that we've loaded into singles and we scale it to the range of 0-1.
That's what we get as an output.
At this point, let's convert this image into a PyTorch tensor.
Again, we apply the same operation.
We convert this image into a tensor by using
the from_numpy function and we apply
the unsqueeze operation to turn it into a four-dimensional tensor.
That's what we get. We have one by one by 768 by 1054 image At this point,
it's fairly easy to apply the convolutions.
We have our convolutional layer and we just call
this convolutional layer on the walrus tensor variable.
Let's also compute the rectified linear unit operation
on the tensor that we get as the output.
As you might remember, convolutional neural networks,
they compute activation functions.
So after you have your convolutions,
you would like to have an activation function to
improve your networks capability to generalize.
Let's see what our convolutions looks like and let's
see what our rectified linear unit look like.
Also, take a note here,
we have this magic function called time,
which let's us measure how much time our operation takes.
On my laptop here, it takes 63 milliseconds, and let's visualize.
So let's visualize our convolved walrus.
So we can see that edges turned out here.
We're applying edge filters,
so things seem to be checking out.
Let's visualize the rectified linear units activation function.
We can see, if you remember, what's a rally layer does,
it basically shaves off all the negative values,
and all the positive values,
they get mapped one on one to linear scale.
So you can see what actually
the rally layer in a real neural network would do with this image.
So another quick note on working with a medical imaging volume,
because this is what I propose you to do in this exercise.
You'll be applying 2D,
2.5D and 3D convolutions to a 3D volume.
Right now, we've done it for a two-dimensional image.
So let's do it for a medical imaging volume.
We will use the NiBabel library to load a NifTI file.
NifTI files, they come with this.nii.gz extension.
Let's do that, and this NiBabel library,
it has this function called get_fdata,
which converts the pixels into a NumPy array.
So let's see what we're dealing with here.
We're dealing with image that has 512 by 512 in plane resolution and has 41 slices.
Let's visualize and see what we're dealing with here.
So last dimension here, well,
I could tell that because I know that it's a CT image.
Typically, CT images, they have isotropic voxels on the in-plane.
So I could have guessed that this last dimension was the z-dimension, and it is.
It's a abdominal crosscut.
So let us look at the slice number 0 and let us look at the slice number 40.
So it seems to be some cut through the abdomen.
So this slice number 40 sits at the top here.
We have lungs here. We have a portion of heart here.
Item slice number 0 sits probably somewhere
at the bottom where we have all these different values here.
Let us visualize the sagittal cross-section of this volume.
So let us do our own little MPR exercise,
similar to what you have done in the previous lesson.
We see the super squished image.
By now, this shouldn't be a surprise for us because we're looking at an image
which is 512 pixels across and just 40 pixels down.
Obviously, this is not what the real anatomy looks like.
So remember, our non-isotropic pixels,
remember how in one of the previous exercises,
we looked at DICOM pixel
spacing and slice thickness parameters to compute the aspect ratio that we should apply.
Right now, we're dealing with NifTI images.
So if you remember the conversation about NifTI,
NifTI has this field called pixdim and this is
the field that stores the information about pixel dimensions.
Let's look at the pixdim field and let's see what is
the aspect ratio that we should apply here.
So without going into too much detail,
if you're curious, I have a link here.
You can go and read up on this pixdim variable.
But basically, I will tell you that the fields that are in the positions 1,
2, and 3 are our three pixel dimensions.
So we have this 0.74 by 0.74 by 5 pixels.
So we have five millimeter slice thickness.
From there, I think you can guess how we should compute our aspect ratio.
Let's do that. We get our image.
Of course, our z-axis resolution is not too great.
So we see that the image is very pixelated.
One last thing that I'm going to show you
is I'm going to give you a convenience function,
which will display several slices through the volume on a nice grid,
similar to how we did it in one of the previous screencasts.
Let's do that and let's visualize some of the slices.
Well, actually, all of this slices in this image,
and this is what we're looking at.
So we have gone through the introductory section of the exercise.
You're welcome to take a closer look at all the operations that we did,
especially at how we converted NumPy arrays into PyTorch tensors,
because you will be doing that a lot as you are building your own neural networks.
Now, I invite you to go and continue working through this notebook,
where I'm suggesting that you should compute 2D, 3D,
and 2.5D convolutions from this medical imaging volume.